The Wordle helper shows five-letter words from which you can select for playing the Wordle game.

- Word Ranking Method:

The five-letter words are assigned a rank according to how common the letters are in the English Wordle words. The 'Occurrence' method does not consider where letters occur in the word. The 'Position' method considers the letter's position. The 'Both' method adds the other two rank values. This helper presents the ranked words from the lowest rank to the highest rank. The word list always shows scrolled to the highest ranking words at its bottom. Scroll the list upwards to see the lower ranking words.

Word rank represents relative occurrence probability; however, any word matching the filter could be the Wordle word regardless of its rank.

- Word Filtering:

The 'Allow Duplicate Letters' option includes words having duplicate letters. After your first or second Wordle choice you should start to consider words with duplicate letters. Depending on your known letters status, duplicate letters ought to be shown before making the third selection.

Checking 'Letters To Be Excluded' letter check boxes results in words not containing those letters.

Checking 'Letters To Be Required' letter check boxes results in words containing those letters. No words will show when six or more letters are required for the word.

The Clear All button in the check box lineups clears all the check boxes in that lineup. The letter check boxes are ordered according to letter use frequency. The vertical lines indicate a jump in letter use frequency and are useful to describe letter rank group types. The group descriptions in turn provide a language useful for discussing game strategy and game results.

'Letter Positioning' is where letters may be excluded or required for one of the five possible Wordle word letter positions. For each requirement, select the letter and position. The plus (+) and minus (-) buttons add or remove the respective position requirement. The Z buttons clear the entire position list.

In the puzzle game context a letter indicated not at its correct position is a letter known to be present in the word, so it will also be required. For such letters, its checkbox will not appear checked in 'Letters To Be Required', but its filter requirement will be applied. If perhaps you want to follow a strict letter elimination strategy, and you want the helper word list to not include unknown position letters, then use the letter's 'Letters To Be Excluded' check box and do not apply an 'Exclude From Position' for that letter. Otherwise, the word list will be empty because no word can have the letter and also not have the letter.

'Special Pattern' allows one to quickly introduce a custom require or exclude filter pattern that can operate on letter position. 'Special Pattern' was initially intended for adjacent letter patterns such as TT, ITE, GHT or SS. One might use this to compare the number of words having a SS pattern versus S.S or S..S patterns where the period character, ".", means 'any letter'. The pattern S..S shows words having any two letters between S letters like the words SMUSH and TSARS. 'Special Pattern' is the only way to require multiple instances of the same letter, like TT.

'Special Pattern' turns out to be especially useful for spotting words groups in part because its setting is independent of the Exclude and Require Position controls. Thus you can very quickly set and then clear 'Special Pattern' without affecting one's thought train. 

'Pick A Random' highlights a random word in the current showing word list. There is a point when narrowing down the list of possible words where the higher ranking words are biased against words containing low ranking letters. Any one of the words shown could be the Wordle word. This feature is intended for use when the list has become small where you can surmise the correct word would be a random selection.

'Highlight Group Optimal' highlights the word or words that result in the lowest average group score when that word is used as a guess. The score is the average of the guess's groups sizes. This analysis is performed on the current words 'Showing' or the entire 'Classic', 'Classic+' or 'Large' vocabularies. The group finding process is lengthy and may take extended time to finish. The group optimal guess word is likely to result in remaining smaller word groups, thus increasing chances to find the solution in fewer guesses. Optimal group analysis should be performed on the total selection list that contains multiple letters because the analysis is for selecting the solution versus guessing for letter discovery. A separate window opens to report all the group pattern information during the analysis when the 'Verbose Report' checkbox is checked. Group optimal words identified from guess word sources other than the showing words cannot be highlighted if the word is not in the shown list. Run the process in verbose mode to find out the words. The Lqty/max value is the maximum found displayed list quantity to guess word's maximum sized group ratio. Higher ratios correspond to smaller expected subsequent guesses for the candidate guess word. The maximum value the ratio can be is the list size. When the ratio is the list size the solution will be the guess after the candidate guess when the candidate guess is not of the list. When the candidate guess is of the list there will be some chance the candidate guess is the solution. The solution will be the guess after the candidate guess when otherwise.

- Word Vocabulary:

The 'Large' vocabulary is the 14,855 word list. Wordle accepts only words that are in the 'Large' vocabulary. A fraction of the 'Large' vocabulary words are words that will be the day's Wordle solution. Originally that faction was 2,309 words. The 'Classic' vocabulary is those 2,309 words. The balance of the 'Large' vocabulary with the 'Classic' vocabulary removed are words that would never be solution words. The New York Times (NYT) acquired Wordle and in coordination with its Wordlebot implementation is making changes to the vocabularies. One change transfers words from 'Large' vocabulary to add to the 'Classic' vocabulary. To twist things a bit not all NYT transferred words are actual solution candidates. The 'Classic' plus the transferred words is the 'Classic+' vocabulary.

Using the 'Classic+' vocabulary yields results essentially identical to what the NYT Wordlebot shows. The transferred words are not published, but they can be inferred from Wordlebot outputs.

Another change the NYT has made is to censure some 'Classic' words. Thus some 'Classic' words that were originally solution candidates have been removed from the possible solutions list. These words are still acceptable play words but will never be a solution and will never show up in a Wordlebot remaining solutions list. These words will show up in 'The Wordle Helper'. When using the 'Classic+' word vocabulary for possible solution candidates, (Make sure 'Allow Duplicate Letters' is checked.), the remaining words should equal what the Wordlebot indicates.

If 'The Wordle Helper' shows more words than 'Wordlebot' by a word or so, then there is a censured word.

If 'The Wordle Helper' shows less words than 'Wordlebot', then 'The Wordle Helper' is missing some transferred words

- Tips:

Please develop your own strategy for picks. Sorry, none are mentioned here. What you discover might be surprising at first.

When adding a new exclusion position for a letter that already has an excluded position, first select that letter's exclusion in the list. That selection puts the letter in the combobox so that you need only to indicate the letter position before pressing the plus (+) button.

Seeing an empty list can seem to be an error at times. No, it is not an error. The criteria you entered resulted in the empty list. A simple example is 'Excluding' a letter and then also 'Requiring' that same letter. The filtering happens in discrete stages. In the simple example, the resulting list of words that exclude a letter is then asked to list words having that same letter. There would be none.

'Exclude From Position' in the 'Letter Positioning' options applies letter requirements for letters you indicate for position exclusion. This is actually two separate filter commands. The letter is required in the word, but not at the position indicated. Wordle uses Yellow color blocks for such letters. In subsequent guesses, Wordle marks that same previously marked Yellow color letter as Grey color when that letter is not in the correct position and when the guess has erroneous multiple instances of that same letter. 'Exclude From Position' such letters. Do not apply the broad brush 'Excluding' for such letters. An empty list results if you do as just previously explained. 

Conversely, to what was just explained above, 'Exclude From Position' when applied for a known multiple letter instance in the wrong indicated position does not specifically limit the filtered list to words having that multiple instance. Beware the filtered list might contain more words than it should. If you know the duplicate letter must be adjacent then apply that adjacency pattern in the 'Special Pattern' control.
